---
layout: post
title:  "Faith Amidst Suffering"
date:   2007-09-02
blurb: "In this sermon, Kevin reflects on the profound contrast between the joy of his son's wedding and the somber visit to Auschwitz. He explores the crisis of faith faced by many during the Holocaust and the enduring message of hope found in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Kevin emphasizes the presence of God in both joy and suffering, and the moral choices that define our humanity."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/proper172007.png"
tags: Proper Special_Occasions
---    
<div class="tag-pills">
  {% for tag in page.tags %}
    {% capture tag_name %}{{ tag }}{% endcapture %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/tag/{{ tag_name }}" class="tag-pill">{{ tag_name }}</a>
  {% endfor %}
</div>
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/proper172007.pdf)

Proper 17 – 2007 – year C – Trinity 13

Last weekend we celebrated one of the joys of family life, the marriage of our elder son Anthony. His bride being Polish, the wedding took place in Poland, in the historic city of Krakow. It was a great joy to be able to conduct the ceremony myself in the Lutheran Church of St Martin using the liturgy of the Church of Ireland in a mixture of English and Polish. Krakow, with the royal castle of Wavel, many beautiful Churches and a magnificent Main Square bustling with life at all hours of the day and night, is a beautiful city, listed as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. As with any such place, there were many trips on offer to different places of interest.

One such trip was to Auschwitz-Birkenau. Situated just over an hour’s journey from Krakow, it is of course synonymous with unspeakable brutality, human suffering and degradation. So last Monday morning we set off on our visit. I had taken a copy of this Sunday’s lessons with me to glance over during the week; the verse that had caught my attention was from our Epistle:

> 'God has said,
> "Never will I leave you;
> never will I forsake you."
> So we say with confidence,
> "The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid.
> What can man do to me?"' (Hebrews 13)

Those words kept recurring in my mind as I listened to our tour guide speak of the horror of Auschwitz and the other death camps in which 6 million Jews, millions of Poles, as well as countless Slavs, handicapped, resistance fighters and others were disposed of on an industrial scale.

The words from the Epistle to the Hebrews seem to fly in the face of the awful reality of that awful place. When I came back, I picked up a passage I had read some years ago. It is a section in a book by Jonathan Sacks, the Chief Rabbi of the British Commonwealth, 'Faith in the Future', I have referred to before. The section is entitled 'On God and Auschwitz' that first appeared in the form of a talk on BBC Radio 4.

[...]

As I wandered around Auschwitz with those words in my mind, I was confronted with two realities. First, there is a dark side to human nature. Secondly, the reality, the responsibility of moral choice. Man is created free; free to go with God, free to go against God. Take away that freedom and moral choice is an illusion. But with moral choice comes awful possibilities when the darker side of human nature comes to the fore.

I come to see God, not as one who insulates us from all pain but as one who is with his people in the midst of their trouble, their anguish and their suffering. God did not die at Auschwitz; He wept tears for his people as they blessed his name at the gates of death. This I think is why I found the cross so powerful. In that anguished cry of despair, 'My God, my God. Why have you abandoned me?' I find in Christ a God who has entered into human suffering, who understands the loneliness and despair and emerged triumphant – and is present with us now through his Spirit.

The images of Auschwitz will remain with me probably as long as those of my son and my daughter-in-law standing before me in St Martin’s in Krakow as I declared them to be husband and wife. I realize, as I reflect on those two images, that the God who shared in my joy last weekend is the same God who remains with me and sustains me in the ups and downs of this mortal life. So I think I can begin to understand what the writer of the Letter to the Hebrews was getting at as he wrote:

> 'God has said,
> "Never will I leave you;
> never will I forsake you."
> So we say with confidence,
> "The Lord is my helper; I will not be afraid.
> What can man do to me?"'
