---
layout: post
title:  "Identity and Sacrifice"
date:   2009-04-12
blurb: "This sermon, delivered on Easter Day in 2009, explores the concept of identity and recognition. It uses the story of Jesus appearing to his disciples after the resurrection as a metaphor for understanding our own identities and values. The sermon emphasizes the importance of self-sacrifice and love, embodied in the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/Easter Day - 2009.png"
---
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/Easter Day - 2009.pdf)    
Not so very long ago I had to call at the sorting office in Baldoyle. The postman had called at the Rectory to deliver a parcel and there was no one at home. He left a note telling me to call at the sorting office to collect it myself. When I went there to ask for the item I was asked, “Do you have any photo identification?” The man at the counter wanted to know who I was; he wanted to be sure that I was not trying to get hold of a parcel that wasn’t mine.

That set me thinking about ways in which we can be identified. There is of course the photo in my passport that I showed to the man behind the counter. But there are lots of other ways in which we can be identified. People will recognise our voice or even the sound of our footsteps along the corridor. Then of course there are more precise ways this can be done. There are those collections of lines and whirls on the end of my fingers, my fingerprint that is unique to me. There is my DNA, that complicated molecule in every cell of my body that is again unique to me – that determines the colour of my eyes, my hair, what height I am going to grow to along with many other characteristics that we are only now beginning to understand.

All of these, my photo, the colour of my eyes and hair, the sound of my voice, my fingertips, my DNA, they all prove that this is Kevin Brew standing in front of you and not some imposter pretending to be me. But do these tell me who I am, what sort of person I am, what are my values, what are my priorities in life. Of course they don’t. You would need to get to know me, to see how I behave, how I think.

This morning in our Gospel passage, Luke tells us of Jesus appearing to his disciples after the resurrection. They were in the upper room. Now they had seen that the tomb was empty. Some of the women had told them that they had seen angels at the tomb telling them he was alive, Mary Magdalene had even said that she had seen them. They were confused and worried, wondering what to do next.

He showed them his hands and his side - marks of his identity. They see these and we are told that they knew who he was; their beloved Master who was crucified, the one they had felt powerless to help. The last time they had seen him was as his broken and tortured body was taken down from the Cross for a hasty burial. He was the one they had followed; they had heard him teach, seen him heal, seen him do remarkable things. But these marks on his hands and his side do more than just confirm his identity. As the hymn 219, ‘From heaven he came’ puts it rather nicely:

> Come see his hands and his feet,
> the scars that speak of sacrifice.
> Hands that flung stars into space
> to cruel nails surrendered.

Those marks are signs of love, self emptying, self forgetting love – in which nothing is held back, embodying in his own person the statement ‘God is love’ And he says to this startled group of men and women, ‘Peace be with you.’ Peace to men and women whose lives had been turned upside down, to those who knew their weakness and failure.
