---
layout: post
title:  "Beyond Appearances"
date:   2009-06-14
blurb: "Kevin's sermon challenges preconceived notions and emphasizes the importance of looking beyond outward appearances to see the true character of individuals. Drawing from the story of David's anointment in the Old Testament, he illustrates how God's perception differs from man's, focusing on the heart rather than external qualities. The sermon encourages us to align our purposes with God's, seeking substance over form for lasting peace and prosperity."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/Proper 6 - 2009.png"
tags: Proper Special_Occasions
---    
<div class="tag-pills">
    {% for tag in page.tags %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/tag/{{ tag | slugify }}" class="tag-pill">{{ tag }}</a>
    {% endfor %}
</div>
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/Proper 6 - 2009.pdf)
They say appearances can be deceptive. Our perceptions of people and situations can be equally misleading. I recall my school days in Birmingham, 1966, when a new student, Lakbir, joined us. Initially judged for his Indian heritage and appearance, Lakbir proved to be hardworking and integral, teaching us the value of seeing beyond stereotypes.

Another instance involved a seemingly respectable man visiting the Rectory in Finglas, who turned out to be a con artist. These experiences remind us that judgments based on appearances and preconceived notions can be flawed.

Our Old Testament Lesson from the First Book of Samuel tells of David's selection as King of Israel. It contrasts human perception with God's, highlighting that while man looks at the outward appearance, God looks at the heart. Samuel's human agenda sought a king who looked the part, but God chose David, who was the part.

David's anointment and subsequent reign represent a golden era in Jewish history, a time when human actions aligned with divine purposes. However, the decline that followed serves as a cautionary tale of the consequences when man's and God's purposes diverge. It's a reminder that a society in sync with God prospers, while one that strays faces decline.

In conclusion, the convergence of divine and human intentions brought about a Golden Age for Israel. We are called to seek a similar alignment in our own lives, pursuing God's will not just in form, but in substance, for therein lies our true peace.
