---
layout: post
title:  "Fruits of the Spirit"
date:   2010-02-28
blurb: "This sermon focuses on the fruits of the Spirit as described in Galatians 5:22-25. It emphasizes that these virtues are the result of a true and lively faith, and that they are pleasing and acceptable to God. The sermon also draws on the analogy of a woman in labor, suggesting that spiritual growth, like childbirth, can involve pain but ultimately leads to joy."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/Week 2.png"
---
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/Week 2.pdf)    
By contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, generosity, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control. There is no law against such things. And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. If we live by the Spirit, let us also be guided by the Spirit. Let us not become conceited, competing against one another, envying one another. Gal 5:22-25

Albeit that Good Works, which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification, cannot put away our sins, and endure the severity of God's judgment; yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and lively Faith insomuch that by them a lively Faith may be as evidently known as a tree discerned by the fruit. Article 12 (BCP 2004 p 781)

'The Holy Spirit enables me to become more like Jesus.' Revised Catechism

'A little while, and you will no longer see me, and again a little while, and you will see me'? Very truly, I tell you, you will weep and mourn, but the world will rejoice; you will have pain, but your pain will turn into joy. When a woman is in labor, she has pain, because her hour has come. But when her child is born, she no longer remembers the anguish because of the joy of having brought a human being into the world. So you have pain now; but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you. John 16:20-22
