---
layout: post
title:  "Fruits of the Spirit"
date:   2010-03-01
blurb: "The sermon explores the fruits of the Spirit as described in Galatians 5:22-25, emphasizing the need for Christians to embody love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, generosity, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control. It also draws from Philippians 2:1-11 to highlight the importance of humility, selflessness, and obedience to God, as exemplified by Jesus Christ."
---
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/week 4.pdf)    
By contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, generosity, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control. There is no law against such things. And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. If we live by the Spirit, let us also be guided by the Spirit. Let us not become conceited, competing against one another, envying one another. (Gal 5:22-25)

'The Holy Spirit enables me to become more like Jesus.' (Revised Catechism)

Phil 2:1 Imitating Christ's Humility

If then there is any encouragement in Christ, any consolation from love, any sharing in the Spirit, any compassion and sympathy, make my joy complete: be of the same mind, having the same love, being in full accord and of one mind. Do nothing from selfish ambition or conceit, but in humility regard others as better than yourselves. Let each of you look not to your own interests, but to the interests of others. Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, (Phil 2:1-5)

Phil 2:6 who, though he was in the form of God, did not regard equality with God as something to be exploited, Phil 2:7 but emptied himself, taking the form of a slave, being born in human likeness. And being found in human form, Phil 2:8 he humbled himself and became obedient to the point of death-- even death on a cross. Phil 2:9 Therefore God also highly exalted him and gave him the name that is above every name, Phil 2:10 so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bend, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, Phil 2:11 and every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
