---
layout: post
title:  "Embracing Everlasting Life"
date:   2012-02-22
blurb: "In this sermon, Kevin discusses the importance of engaging with the Scriptures, not just reading them, but allowing them to read us. He emphasizes the significance of the Bible in our daily lives and how it can provide both encouragement and challenge. He invites the congregation to join him in shared reflection on the Scriptures during Lent."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/ashwednesday2012.png"
tags: Lent Mid_Week
---    
<div class="tag-pills">
  {% for tag in page.tags %}
    {% capture tag_name %}{{ tag }}{% endcapture %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/tag/{{ tag_name | slugify }}" class="tag-pill">{{ tag_name }}</a>
  {% endfor %}
</div>
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/ashwednesday2012.pdf)

Blessed Lord,
who caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our learning:
help us so to hear them,
to read, mark, learn and inwardly digest them
that, through patience, and the comfort of your holy word,
we may embrace and for ever hold fast
the hope of everlasting life,
which you have given us in our Saviour Jesus Christ,
who is alive and reigns with you,
in the unity of the Holy Spirit,
one God, now and for ever.

So runs the Collect for the Last Sunday after Trinity, previously used for the
Second Sunday in Advent and, for that reason, often called Bible Sunday.

The Scriptures lie at the heart of our worship. One of the features of our Anglican
tradition is our ordered reading of the Scriptures, Sunday by Sunday. In the
course of our three year cycle of readings we reflect on all the major themes of
scripture and our readings are drawn from all sections of the Bible.

It has been said of the Bible, that it is not just a matter of us reading the Bible, the
Bible reads us. When this happens, there is a resonance between the words we
read, the words we hear and our daily living. On occasions, this will be one of
encouragement; on other occasions the words we read and hear will challenge us.

What we are talking about here is an engagement with the Scriptures, that as we
read and hear the scriptures we not only hear and read the words of the Bible but
in and through them hear God's word to us and for us. This is very much
expressed in the words of this collect:

> help us so to hear them,
> to read, mark, learn and inwardly digest them
> that, through patience, and the comfort of your holy word,
> we may embrace and for ever hold fast
> the hope of everlasting life,

Our Prayer Book is called the Book of Common Prayer. Common Prayer, prayer
we undertake together, as a community. And so our reading and reflection on the
Scriptures is a Common Reading, a shared activity. This Lent, instead of our
customary evening services, I want to take the opportunity of exploring this idea
of our shared reflection on the Scriptures Sunday by Sunday a little further. Each
Wednesday night I am inviting folk to the Rectory for a simple reflection on the
Scriptures set for the following Sunday to which we would all contribute, from
which we can all receive. So each Sunday copies of the readings for the
following Sunday will be available and they will also be posted on the Parish
Website. You might choose, instead of coming to the groups that meet in the
Rectory, you might just wish to reflect on them yourself in your own quiet time.

Speaking on the Anniversary of the publication of the Authorised Version of the
Bible, Archbishop Rowan Williams remarked that one of the principle insights of
the Reformers was that the Bible was intended to be read in community, that even
our individual reading of the Scriptures was in the context of our shared reading
of the Scriptures in public worship.

And so as we approach our readings, Sunday by Sunday,

> help us so to hear them,
> to read, mark, learn and inwardly digest them
> that, through patience, and the comfort of your holy word,
> we may embrace and for ever hold fast
> the hope of everlasting life,
