---
layout: post
title:  "Tradition and Change"
date:   2012-04-15
blurb: "In this sermon, Kevin reflects on the evolving nature of tradition within the church, emphasizing that change is not for its own sake but to adapt to the times while upholding the Gospel's timeless truths. He discusses initiatives to engage youth and maintain church traditions, acknowledging the contributions of various community members in supporting the church's growth and fellowship."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/eastervestry2012.png"
tags: Easter Vestry
---    
<div class="tag-pills">
    {% for tag in page.tags %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/tag/{{ tag | slugify }}" class="tag-pill">{{ tag }}</a>
    {% endfor %}
</div>
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/eastervestry2012.pdf)
Easter General Vestry - 15th April 2012

At last year's Easter General Vestry, Kevin reflected on Archbishop Jackson's Enthronement sermon, addressing the changing environment for proclaiming the Gospel in our generation. He discussed tradition as a living and developing phenomenon, with change not undertaken simply for its own sake.

Later this month, the Archbishop is bringing the clergy together for a Forum to discuss Growth and Development. Rev George Lings, director of the Church Army Research Unit, will be the keynote speaker.

Kevin talks about the common experience of declining numbers in churches and initiatives to address these issues, such as the establishment of CORE and a parallel congregation in Rathmines.

St Mary's has initiated several projects to engage youth, including Youth Groups and services. However, funding is now limited, and the Youth project will continue on a reduced scale.

Sunday School has flourished with increased emphasis on worship participation, and new services like the Family Eucharist have been introduced to bridge traditional and contemporary styles.

Kevin thanks various community members for their contributions, including church wardens, the Select Vestry, and those involved in the Youth Project, Sunday School, and Parish Centre management. He also acknowledges the importance of fellowship within the church community.

In conclusion, Kevin announces new appointments for the coming year and reflects on the baptisms, weddings, and funerals he has performed, highlighting the ongoing life events within the church community.
