---
layout: post
title:  "Perspectives of Faith"
date:   2017-07-02
blurb: "Kevin reflects on the well-known story of Abraham and Isaac from a fresh perspective, considering Isaac's experience and emotions. He connects this to personal struggles with faith and understanding God's purpose in times of pain. The sermon emphasizes the importance of honesty before God and finding comfort in the Psalms during hardship."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/proper82017.png"
tags: Proper Special_Occasions
---
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/proper82017.pdf)    
### PROPER 8 – Year A - 2017 – Trinity 3

This year as we go through the season of Trinity, we are following the stories of the old Hebrew Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. These stories are challenging, involving real human beings with emotions, prejudices, and blind spots. Last week, we reflected on Sarah and her son Isaac. Sarah's fear and jealousy could not frustrate God's purposes for Isaac and Ishmael.

We often hear these stories without truly listening. Consider Abraham's call to sacrifice his son. The focus is usually on Abraham's pain, but what about Isaac's terror? This realization broadened my perspective, and now I reflect on this passage from Isaac's point of view. It reminds us of times when it's hard to see God in painful situations.

Some time ago, I learned of my mother's inoperable cancer. I was devastated and angry, unable to recite the creed. Lectures on the Psalms taught me that it's okay to express all emotions to God. This helped me see my life in the context of God's purposes.

Isaac grew up to play his part as a Patriarch. Life can be difficult to understand and seem unfair, but the Psalms remind us that we are not alone. God hears our pain and understands. I close with a reflection from the book 'Out of the Deep' on the Psalms, which emphasizes that it's alright to be angry and lonely, and that our feelings are heard by God.

> Psalm 139
> 6 Where can I go then from your spirit? Or where can I flee from your presence?
> 7 If I climb up to heaven, you are there; if I make the grave my bed, you are there also.
> 8 If I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
> 9 Even there your hand shall lead me, your right hand hold me fast.
> 10 If I say, 'Surely the darkness will cover me and the light around me turn to night,'
> 11 Even darkness is no darkness with you; the night is as clear as the day; darkness and light to you are both alike.
