---
layout: post
title:  "Wisdom and Understanding"
date:   2018-09-16
blurb: "Kevin reflects on the true meaning of wisdom and understanding, contrasting it with mere knowledge. He shares the story of Lilly Leggett, a woman of profound insight and care, who exemplified wisdom in her simple yet impactful life. The sermon draws from the Letter of James and the teachings of Jesus to emphasize a life of service and humility, challenging the worldly pursuit of status and power."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/proper202018.png"
tags: Proper Special_Occasions
---    
<div class="tag-pills">
  {% for tag in page.tags %}
    {% capture tag_name %}{{ tag }}{% endcapture %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/tag/{{ tag_name }}" class="tag-pill">{{ tag_name }}</a>
  {% endfor %}
</div>
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/proper202018.pdf)

PROPER 20 – Year B - 2015 – Trinity 16.

Who is wise and understanding among you? James 3:13

Kevin speaks of the privilege of meeting a variety of people in his ministry, particularly recalling Lilly Leggett, a caring woman with deep wisdom. He distinguishes between knowledge and wisdom, suggesting that wisdom involves a new way of living and thinking, aligned with God's values rather than worldly wisdom.

> 20 Where is the one who is wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? 1 Cor 1:20-21

Kevin discusses the hierarchical nature of society and how Jesus taught his disciples to adopt a different perspective, valuing service and humility over status.

> 33 Then they came to Capernaum; and when he was in the house he asked them, 'What were you arguing about on the way?' 34 But they were silent, for on the way they had argued with one another who was the greatest. Mark 9:33-34

To follow Jesus is to embrace a different worldview, one that reaches out to the marginalized and teaches selflessness. Kevin concludes by reflecting on the wisdom of Lilly Leggett, whose life was a testament to the kind of wisdom that comes from a warm humanity and a simple, uncomplicated faith.
