---
layout: post
title:  "Truth in Scripture"
date:   2019-12-08
blurb: "This sermon focuses on the theme of 'Truth' as depicted in various verses of the Bible. It explores the concept of truth in relation to God, salvation, wisdom, and the Spirit of truth. The sermon also addresses the distortion of truth and the importance of speaking the truth in love for spiritual growth."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/2bfadvent2019 - notes.png"
---
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/2bfadvent2019 - notes.pdf)    
Psalm 25.5

> Lead me in your truth, and teach me,
> for you are the God of my salvation;
> for you I wait all day long.

Ps 51:6

> You desire truth in the inward being;
> therefore teach me wisdom in my secret heart.

Ps 86:11

> Teach me your way, O Lord,
> that I may walk in your truth;
> give me an undivided heart to revere your name.

Amos 5:10

> They hate the one who reproves in the gate,
> and they abhor the one who speaks the truth.

John 14:16,17

> And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another Advocate, to be with you forever. This is the Spirit of truth,
> whom the world cannot receive, because it neither sees him nor knows him. You know him, because he abides
> with you, and he will be in you.

John 16:13,14

> When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth; for he will not speak on his own, but will speak
> whatever he hears, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. He will glorify me, because he will take
> what is mine and declare it to you.

John 18:37,38

> Pilate asked him, “So you are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say that I am a king. For this I was born, and for this I
> came into the world, to testify to the truth. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice.” Pilate asked
> him, “What is truth?”

Acts 20:30

> Some even from your own group will come distorting the truth in order to entice the disciples to follow them.

Ephesians 4:15,16

> But speaking the truth in love, we must grow up in every way into him who is the head, into Christ, from whom
> the whole body, joined and knit together by every ligament with which it is equipped, as each part is working
> properly, promotes the body’s growth in building itself up in love.
