---
layout: post
title:  "Trinity Sunday 2019"
date:   2019-06-16
blurb: "On Trinity Sunday 2019, Kevin discusses the concept of God as the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. He emphasizes the importance of understanding God not just as a creator, but as a being in a relationship with us. He also highlights the importance of living in harmony with our creator and the world he created."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/trinity2019.png"
tags: Proper Special_Occasions
---    
<div class="tag-pills">
    {% for tag in page.tags %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/tag/{{ tag | slugify }}" class="tag-pill">{{ tag }}</a>
    {% endfor %}
</div>
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/trinity2019.pdf)
Today is Trinity Sunday, when we think upon God as Father Son and Holy Spirit. It is a day on which the preacher can tie him or herself in knots (and probably the congregation as well) as they get lost in closely argued philosophical speculation. As for myself I see it as one of those days for standing back and taking a look at the big picture, for thinking of the wonder of God, the wonder of this world and our place in it.

As I have mentioned before, my own path to faith came through my interest in science. One of my key memories is of an 'A' Level Physics class. My physics teacher, himself a devout member of the Church of England, had been talking of the order of the created world. He then challenged us, 'Don't tell me that that is all down to chance.'

A number of years ago, I was sharing this memory with a colleague and he added, 'Yes, but we don't just worship an engineer.' What he was emphasising is that there is more to our understanding of God as creator than one who simply makes, who constructs this wonderful world in which we live; who once the job is finished disappears to take on his next job. Our understanding of God from the very beginning has embodies the concept of relationship.

We sometimes fall into the trap of thinking that Genesis 1 and 2 is the sum total of what the Bible has to say about Creation. There is in addition to these what is known as the Wisdom tradition from which our reading from Proverbs and our Psalm.

The passage we read from the Book Proverbs speaks of Wisdom in very personal terms, as one created before the beginning of the world, who works with God in the work of creation itself. This whole passage speaks to me of the underlying order of creation to which the work of the scientist bears witness. But, as my friend reminded me, the ordered creation the scientist observes is not just a lifeless machine made by some celestial engineer. For the writer speaks not just of the underlying order to the world in which we live but also of an underlying purpose that lies at the very heart of creation..

We are challenged, as we look at the world, as we marvel at the beauty of nature whether it be in the sunset and sweep of a mountain range, the majesty of the night sky or the intricacy of a snow flake, the delicacy of a flower or the amazing world of the atom; we are challenged to look beyond all that to the God behind it all.

The German theologian, Rudolph Bultmann, wrote, 'to acknowledge God as Creator is to acknowledge myself as his creature and to bow down and worship.' To recognise order and purpose in the created order is to begin to acknowledge order and purpose in our own lives. I find that in the context of my relationship with God. In the words of the Shorter Catechism of the Presbyterian Church; 'Man's chief end is to glorify God and enjoy him for ever.'

As I read the passage from Proverbs that we read from today, my mind recalls those opening words of St John's Gospel:

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 2 He was in the beginning with God. 3 All things came into being through him, and without him not one thing came into being. What has come into being 4 in him was life, and the life was the light of all people. John 1:1-4

This emphasises for me that the order and coherence that I am talking about is essentially personal. My search for meaning and purpose in the world eventually moves into the sphere of encounter – as is the experience of any of us who have looked at a sunset or night sky and have been moved to wonder how all this came to be and have proclaimed in their hearts 'How great thou art!'. For you never encounter a thing – you encounter a person.

I cannot be indifferent to this person whom I encounter. As Bultmann said, to acknowledge God as creator is to acknowledge myself as his creature and to bow down and worship. I also discover in the words of Proverbs and those opening words of John's Gospel that the Creator is totally committed to his work, totally committed to this strange creature man that he has placed at the heart of his creation. And I discover the profound truth behind those words to Nicodemus who came to Jesus by night, 'God so loved the world that he gave his only son'. – the commitment is total.

We hear a great deal these days of the importance of living in harmony with creation. Many of the problems of the environment, global warming, pollution, disposal of nuclear waste are seen as symptomatic of our failure in this regard. To truly live in harmony with creation I need to live in harmony with my creator. This is where the personal dimension of creation, the commitment of the creator to his creation becomes so important. Amidst all the demands for attention in our busy world, we so often miss out on the importance of this need for harmony with our creator. As we are reminded in those opening verses of St John Gospel:

11 He came to what was his own, and his own people did not accept him. 12 But to all who received him, who believed in his name, he gave power to become children of God, John 1:11-12

This whole area of harmony and disharmony with creation, with the creator in turn highlights the importance of the faith relationship between creator and creature, my response to the God who created me, who loves me and redeemed me in Christ. This harmony with the creator which I experience through faith means I find him not just in things of beauty. I can know that he is with us in the darker times of danger, of anxiety and in so doing we can find something of the peace that God alone can give.

This Trinity Sunday, we have in our meandering thoughts been reflecting on the totality of our relationship with God, a God who gives himself in his work of creation and in his ongoing commitment to it in the giving of his Son. May we find that harmony with him that is his will for us, finding in him the very source of our being, the very foundation of our hope and the source of our strength and so find that peace that passes all understanding, that ultimate healing that God alone can give.
