---
layout: post
title:  "Light in the Darkness"
date:   2020-12-25
blurb: "In the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, this sermon brings a message of hope and light. Drawing from the Prophet Isaiah and the Gospel of John, it emphasizes that even in times of darkness and uncertainty, God's light shines through. It acknowledges the challenges and fears brought about by the pandemic, but also highlights the acts of kindness and resilience that have emerged."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/christmas2020.png"
---
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/christmas2020.pdf)    
Back in the 9th century BC, in a time of great national and international uncertainty in the Middle East, the Prophet Isaiah declared:

> The people walking in darkness
> have seen a great light;
> on those living in the land of the shadow of death
> a light has dawned. Isaiah 9:1,2

In Old Testament thought, darkness is synonymous with an absence of God, of hope, of future. In contrast, light is associated with life, with health, with salvation. So even in Judah's darkest hour, the prophet points to hope. He speaks of a future Messianic king; the arrival of this child is, as in any family, is to be a sign of future, a source of hope.

Standing as we are at the end of 2020, we are aware of a great darkness that has hung over us in the form of the Covid 19 Pandemic; this Christmas, a Christmas like no other we have ever experienced, is but one aspect of the effect it has had on all levels of society. We think of those who have suffered as a result through sickness and bereavement. Our community and business life, school and college life, Church life, personal life have all suffered.

But, even in the midst of the darkness, there has been light. I think of the work of all sectors of our health services who have done magnificent work, some at considerable cost to their own health and wellbeing. Talking to people in the Parish who have been isolated, I have been struck by how many have remarked on the kindness of neighbours and fellow members of the Parish who have been in touch, who have offered help, who have offered the simple gift of time and a listening ear.

Each year, at this service, we read those lovely words that form the opening of John's Gospel

> All things came into being through him, and without him not one
> thing came into being. What has come into being in him was life, and
> the life was the light of all people. The light shines in the darkness,
> and the darkness did not overcome it.

The message of Christmas, the message of the Incarnation, Emmanuel, God coming among us in the person of Jesus is that God does see, God does really care. In the person of Jesus, God has experienced what it is like to be human, what it is to be me, to be you; what it is to hope, to fear, to laugh, to cry. He knows, really knows, what it is to know loneliness, to be let down; what it is to die – and in his resurrection to triumph over it all.

> The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not overcome it.

God is with us, God remains with us, God will stay with us.

> 'I am with you always – to the very end of time.'

Even this pandemic that has overshadowed us this year, will pass. The time is coming, and coming soon, when we will be able to hug our friends and loved ones again, when we will see the smiles that are now hidden behind the masks. In the meantime, stay safe, keep everyone around you safe – and have a Happy and Blessed Christmas.
