---
layout: post
title:  "Radical Loyalty to Jesus"
date:   2020-06-21
blurb: "Kevin's sermon explores the radical loyalty to Jesus that should inform and underline our other commitments. He discusses the challenges of living in accordance with Jesus' teachings, especially when they conflict with familial and societal expectations. The sermon emphasizes the support and companionship Jesus offers on our spiritual journey, encouraging us to approach the throne of grace with boldness."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/proper72020.png"
tags: Proper Special_Occasions
---    
<div class="tag-pills">
  {% for tag in page.tags %}
    {% capture tag_name %}{{ tag }}{% endcapture %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/tag/{{ tag_name }}" class="tag-pill">{{ tag_name }}</a>
  {% endfor %}
</div>
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/proper72020.pdf)

PROPER 7 – Year A – 2020 Trinity 2

Lord, you have taught us that all our doings without love are nothing worth: send your Holy Spirit and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift of love, the true bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whoever lives is counted dead before you. Grant this for your only Son Jesus Christ’s sake.

Gospel Matthew 10.24-39

Jesus summoned the twelve and sent them out with the following instruction: 'A disciple is not above the teacher, nor a slave above the master; it is enough for the disciple to be like the teacher, and the slave like the master. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more will they malign those of his household!'

> 'So have no fear of them; for nothing is covered up that will not be uncovered, and nothing secret that will not become known. What I say to you in the dark, tell in the light; and what you hear whispered, proclaim from the housetops. Do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul; rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell. Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? Yet not one of them will fall to the ground unperceived by your Father. And even the hairs of your head are all counted. So do not be afraid; you are of more value than many sparrows.'

Everyone therefore who acknowledges me before others, I also will acknowledge before my Father in heaven; but whoever denies me before others, I also will deny before my Father in heaven.

'Do not think that I have come to bring peace to the earth; I have not come to bring peace, but a sword. For I have come to set a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; and one’s foes will be members of one’s own household. Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me; and whoever does not take up the cross and follow me is not worthy of me. Those who find their life will lose it, and those who lose their life for my sake will find it.'

Kevin reflects on the Revised Common Lectionary and its role in unifying worship across different traditions. He addresses the difficult teachings of Jesus, such as the expectation to prioritize loyalty to Him over familial ties. The sermon includes a dramatic presentation of the Lord’s Prayer, which emphasizes the practical application of Jesus' teachings in daily life and the importance of forgiveness and reliance on God’s support.

The sermon concludes with a reminder that Jesus, who asks for our loyalty, is also the companion who understands our struggles and offers mercy and grace in times of need.
