---
layout: post
title:  "Prayers for Proper 13"
date:   2023-08-06
blurb: "This sermon emphasizes the importance of seeking God, serving His love to the world, and praying for the world's leaders, the sick, and those in despair. It ends with a prayer of thanksgiving for spiritual nourishment and a plea for acceptance of these prayers in the name of Jesus Christ."
og_image: "/assets/img/posts/prayers - proper132023.png"
tags: Church_of_Gaurdian_Spirit Proper
---
[Original PDF](/assets/pdf/prayers - proper132023.pdf)    
We have gathered here to meet with our God in worship. Let us pray to him now. Lord, awaken in us our need of you and make us hungry and thirsty for you, both as individuals and as the Church of God. Let no other side issues side track us from seeking you, and increase our love and compassion so that we long to serve out your love to the world around us. Lord, in your mercy: hear our prayer.

Lord, allow our world to see the true value of things, so that the worthless and the dangerous is unmasked and real needs acknowledged. Guide our leaders in wisdom and integrity. Bless Charles our king and all in authority. We pray for leaders in our own Province and bless all who work for peace and reconciliation. Enable us all to cooperate in proper care and stewardship of the world's resources. Lord, in your mercy: hear our prayer.

Lord, as we eat our food this week, remind us of your spiritual feeding. May the meals we prepare and eat together be opportunities for drawing closer to one another and to you. Lord, in your mercy: hear our prayer.

Lord, we pray for all who are sick, all who need medical treatment all are waiting in pain for surgery. We pray for those who have become addicted and long to be set free. We pray for all who's wrong choices have ended in heartache, disillusion and despair. Lord, in your mercy: hear our prayer.

Lord, we remember with thanksgiving all who have served you faithfully and are now in your closer presence. We pray that we may share with them the joys of your perfect Kingdom. Lord, in your mercy: hear our prayer.

Lord, thank you for feeding us with spiritual food that satisfies our souls. Merciful Father, Accept these prayers for the sake of your son, our saviour Jesus Christ.
